From cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu  Fri Feb 19 12:26:12 1999
Return-Path: <cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu>
Received: from sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil (sun28.aic.nrl.navy.mil [132.250.84.38])
	by mc.lcs.mit.edu (8.9.1a/8.9.1-mod) with SMTP id MAA19007
	for <cube-lovers-outbound@mc.lcs.mit.edu>; Fri, 19 Feb 1999 12:26:11 -0500 (EST)
Precedence: bulk
Errors-To: cube-lovers-errors@mc.lcs.mit.edu
Date: Thu, 18 Feb 1999 23:45:18 -0400 (EDT)
From: Jerry Bryan <jbryan@pstcc.cc.tn.us>
Subject: Edges only, Ignoring Flips, Face Turn Metric
To: Cube-Lovers <cube-lovers@ai.mit.edu>
Message-Id: <Pine.PMDF.3.95.990218232951.21673A-100000@PSTCC6.PSTCC.CC.TN.US>

I have completed a God's Algorithm run in the face turn metric for the
group consisting of edges only ignoring flips.  The size of the group is
therefore 12!  The results are as follows:

  Distance    Patterns   Positions    Branching
    From                               Factor
   Start

     0f            1              1
     1f            2             18     18.000
     2f            9            243     13.500
     3f           75           3240     13.333
     4f          920          42535     13.128
     5f        11406         542234     12.748
     6f       136423        6529891     12.043
     7f      1386164       66478628     10.181
     8f      6481303      310957078      4.678
     9f      1969536       94443600      0.304
    10f          129           4132      0.000

  Total      9985968      479001600

I should mention that Herbert Kociemba was the first to calculate the
"patterns" column.  He did it as a part of an investigation into
developing an IDA* optimal solver, with the patterns column being part of
a patterns data base used by the IDA* algorithm.

I used my usual program where (for example) I calculate the set of all
positions which are 10f from Start by forming the products of all
positions which are 5f from Start in lexicographic order, and throwing
away the duplicates and the ones that are shorter than 10f.

This technique is reasonably efficient when the branching factor is fairly
constant, as it is at this distance from Start for larger problems such as
the whole cube.  However, it is very inefficient for this particular
problem.  I have to calculate about (542234^2)/48 products just to get the
129 products I keep at 10f from Start.  (The "divide by 48" takes symmetry
into account.)  In a "one level at a time" search by contrast, the tail of
the distribution usually goes very quickly because there are so few
positions in the tail.

I have come to believe that any corners only (with or without twist) or
edges only (with or without flip) group, or the group which keeps both
corners and edges but without twists and flips, will be a fairly poor
pattern data base for IDA*.  The problem is that any such search space
will have a diameter which is too small, and more importantly will have an
average distance from Start which is too small.

Here is why I think the diameter and average distance from Start will be
too small for these groups.  Consider the quarter turn metric.  We know
immediately that the maximum branching factor is 12 because there are 12
quarter turns.  We know almost as immediately that the maximum branching
factor beyond one move from Start is 11 because there is always at least
one quarter turn that goes closer to Start.  Finally, readers of
Cube-lovers know that the maximum branching factor is asymptotic to about
9.3 because of Dan Hoey's syllable analysis.  Syllable analysis takes into
account moves which commute because they are on opposite faces such as
RL=LR.

(Similar analysis for the face turn metric yields an asymptotic maximum
branching factor of about 13.3)

I have come to think of syllable analysis not just as an upper limit for
the branching factor but as a predictor for the branching factor. Indeed,
the actual branching factor differs from the branching factor "predicted"
by syllable analysis only because of duplicate positions which arise from
processes which are not accounted for by syllable analysis.

Such duplicate positions must exist by the finiteness of the problem, else
a God's algorithm search would be infinite.  But such duplicate positions
are non-trivial and are generally not very close to Start. With the full
cube, they are quite rare as close to Start as has been searched so far
(10f and 12q, respectively).

What happens with a typical search is that the branching factor stays
relatively constant until within a couple of levels of the mode of the
frequency distribution of the distances from Start.  The branching factor
then declines rapidly due to duplicate positions, and there is a short
tail in the frequency distribution just past the mode.

The key point is that syllable analysis is identical for all groups
involving corners only, edges only, corners and edges, and/or with or
without twists and flips.  Hence, the basic branching factor is the same
for all such groups.  Therefore, the mode of the distribution is reached
much sooner when the group is smaller and the average distance from Start
is much smaller.

What would be desirable for a pattern data base for IDA* would be a
subgroup of G whose branching factor was smaller so that the mode, the
diameter, and the average distance from Start would be larger.  That is,
what would be desirable would be a subgroup which was not constrained by
standard syllable analysis.  Failing that, it seems to me that the only
way to improve the pattern data base is to make it larger.  In this light,
I interpret what Mike Reid (and more recently) Herbert Kociemba have done
with their IDA* programs is to find clever ways to make their pattern data
bases as large as possible, but they do it in such a way (using symmetry
and other equivalence classes) that their large data bases are small
enough to store in memory'

As I think has been mentioned before, a group such as <U,R> has a small
branching factor but is not suitable as a pattern data base for IDA*
because the distance from Start for a particular position in <U,R> may be
larger than the distance from Start for the same position in G.

Jerry Bryan

