From: Mike Green <mgreen@speakeasy.org>
To: Dale Newfield <DNewfield@cs.virginia.edu>
Cc: Dale Newfield <din5w@cs.virginia.edu>, Dale Newfield <Dale@Newfield.org>
Subject: "Rubik's Revenge" - 4x4x4

Dale,

Thank you for your inquiry.  We do have a limited number of "Rubik's
Revenge" parts for those of you who have a broken cube: 

         ITC-030a 4x4x4 Center Cubie - Ideal Toy Co. $ 2.50 each 
         ITC-030b 4x4x4 Ball Center - Ideal Toy Co.  $10.00 each 
         ITC-030c 4x4x4 Corner Cubie - Ideal Toy Co. $ 2.00 each 
         ITC-030d 4x4x4 Edge Cubie - Ideal Toy Co.   $ 2.00 each 
         ITC-030e 4x4x4 Sticker - Ideal Toy Co.      $  .50 each

You want 1 corner and 2 centers?  You will reuse your stickers?  How will
you pay?  Postage will probably be $2.00. 

Recently the price of a "Rubik's Revenge" has hit as high as $200.00 each
on the "Web". Can you believe that! The last five we sold, fortunately for
our customers, went for $65.00 each. How would you like to see it back in
the market for less than $30.00? Possibly even less than $25.00. Would you
buy more than one?  For us to bring it back we have to place a minimum
order of between 10,000 to 30,000 pieces and pay for new tooling - all up
front. Tell your friends and have them tell their friends, and their
friend's friends to get on our wish list. Have your local puzzle retailer
contact us as well. By using the power of the "Internet", e-mail, and word
of mouth I'm sure we can get the numbers up there and make this happen in
less than a year. I'm ready and willing are you? 

In the meantime, we also carry as standard stock the Rubik's 2x2x2 for
$5.99, Rubik's 3x3x3 for $10.99, 3x3x3 Magic Cube for $6.99, 5x5x5 for
$38.99, Square 1 for $14.99, and Skewb for $32. 

We also pull in on a fairly regular basis Megaminx, Impossiball, Pyraminx,
Mickey's Challenge, Masterballs, and various other sequential movement
puzzles when we can. Prices and quantities vary, but we're always on the
hunt.

We'd very much like to bring the 4x4x4 back to market. You can help
greatly by spreading the word. 

Thank you.

Sincerely,

Mike D. Green 
President

